@xen-orchestra/web-core/docs/i18n.md, before:

# Internationalization (i18n)

Internationalization of the app is done with [Vue-i18n](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/).

Sources of truth are `en.json` files in different projects.

## Translation files to use

| Target                          | Path                          | Notes                 |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Shared between XO Lite and XO 6 | `web-core/lib/locales/*.json` |                       |
| Specific to XO Core             | `web-core/lib/locales/*.json` | Prefixed with `core.` |

## Translation keys

Translation keys MUST be in English and SHOULD use kebab-case.

Translation keys MUST NOT be nested. To group keys, use `prefix.key: value` instead of `prefix: { key: value }`.

Translation keys MUST be sorted alphabetically.

As a bonus, this will allow the usage of `foo` and `foo.bar` as separate keys.

❌ BAD

```json
{
  "bonjour": "Hello",
  "foo_bar": "Foo Bar",
  "a": "A",
  "b": {
    "foo": "B Foo",
    "bar": "B Bar",
    "baz": "B Baz"
  },
  "c": "C"
}
```

✅ GOOD

```json
{
  "a": "A",
  "b.bar": "B Bar",
  "b.baz": "B Baz",
  "b.foo": "B Foo",
  "c": "C",
  "foo-bar": "Foo Bar",
  "hello": "Hello"
}
```

## Punctuation

Strings punctuations should be included in the translation key.

This allows better adapting the punctuation to the rules of the target language.

For example:

- in English, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with no space before it
- in French, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with a space before it
- in Spanish, interrogative sentences start with an inverted question mark and end with a question mark with no spaces

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since HTML is not accepted in translations, you must use a non-breaking space character (` `) instead of `&nbsp;`

### Example:

#### English

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirm",
  "confirm?": "Confirm?",
  "warning": "Warning",
  "warning!:": "Warning!"
}
```

#### French

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmer",
  "confirm?": "Confirmer ?",
  "warning": "Avertissement",
  "warning!:": "Attention !"
}
```

#### Spanish

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmar",
  "confirm?": "¿Confirmar?",
  "warning": "Advertencia",
  "warning!:": "¡Atención!"
}
```

## Percentages

To include a percentage in a translation, use `$n(value, 'percent')`.

The value will be rounded to two decimal places maximum.

## Numbers

To include a number in a translation, use `$n(value)`.

## Dates and times

To include a date or a time in a translation, use `$d(value, '<format>')`.

### Example

```html
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 at 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "time") }}</p>
<!-- 06:30 PM -->
```

## Literal strings

Literal strings are not allowed in Vue templates.

If you really need to **exceptionally** include a literal string, you can either:

- use the mustache syntax with concatenation

  ```html
  <!-- ❌ BAD -->
  <div>v{{ version }}</div>

  <!-- ✅ GOOD -->
  <div>{{ `v${version}` }}</div>
  ```

- add the string as an exception in `.eslintrc.js` for the `@intlify/vue-i18n/no-raw-text` rule

> [!TIP]
> In most cases, literal strings will not be necessary. Think twice before using them.

## Adding a new locale

> [!NOTE]
> Only `EN` and `FR` locales are fully supported by XO team.

For other locales added by contributors, some keys might be missing when we add new translations.

This can result in ESLint errors when some translation keys are missing. To avoid this, remember to add the locale to the list of excluded files in `.eslintrc.js` at the root of the project (rule is `'@intlify/vue-i18n/no-missing-keys-in-other-locales': ['error', { ignoreLocales: ['de', 'fa'] }]` on line 218).

Commit message:

chore(xo-core/docs): update guidelines (#8519)

@xen-orchestra/web-core/docs/i18n.md, after:

# Internationalization (i18n)

Internationalization of the app is done with [Vue-i18n](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/).

Sources of truth are `en.json` files in different projects.

## Translation files to use

| Target                          | Path                          | Notes                 |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Shared between XO Lite and XO 6 | `web-core/lib/locales/*.json` |                       |
| Specific to XO Core             | `web-core/lib/locales/*.json` | Prefixed with `core.` |

## Translation keys

Translation keys MUST be in English and SHOULD use kebab-case.

Translation keys MUST NOT be nested. To group keys, use `prefix.key: value` instead of `prefix: { key: value }`.

Translation keys MUST be sorted alphabetically.

As a bonus, this will allow the usage of `foo` and `foo.bar` as separate keys.

❌ BAD

```json
{
  "bonjour": "Hello",
  "foo_bar": "Foo Bar",
  "a": "A",
  "b": {
    "foo": "B Foo",
    "bar": "B Bar",
    "baz": "B Baz"
  },
  "c": "C"
}
```

✅ GOOD

```json
{
  "a": "A",
  "b.bar": "B Bar",
  "b.baz": "B Baz",
  "b.foo": "B Foo",
  "c": "C",
  "foo-bar": "Foo Bar",
  "hello": "Hello"
}
```

## Punctuation

Strings punctuations should be included in the translation key.

This allows better adapting the punctuation to the rules of the target language.

For example:

- in English, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with no space before it
- in French, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with a space before it
- in Spanish, interrogative sentences start with an inverted question mark and end with a question mark with no spaces

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since HTML is not accepted in translations, you must use a non-breaking space character (` `) instead of `&nbsp;`

### Example:

#### English

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirm",
  "confirm?": "Confirm?",
  "warning": "Warning",
  "warning!:": "Warning!"
}
```

#### French

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmer",
  "confirm?": "Confirmer ?",
  "warning": "Avertissement",
  "warning!:": "Attention !"
}
```

#### Spanish

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmar",
  "confirm?": "¿Confirmar?",
  "warning": "Advertencia",
  "warning!:": "¡Atención!"
}
```

## Percentages

To include a percentage in a translation, use `$n(value, 'percent')`.

The value will be rounded to two decimal places maximum.

## Numbers

To include a number in a translation, use `$n(value)`.

## Dates and times

To include a date or a time in a translation, use `$d(value, '<format>')`.

### Example

```html
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "date_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "datetime_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 at 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ $d(date, "time") }}</p>
<!-- 06:30 PM -->
```

## Literal strings

Literal strings are not allowed in Vue templates.

If you really need to **exceptionally** include a literal string, you can either:

- use the mustache syntax with concatenation

  ```html
  <!-- ❌ BAD -->
  <div>v{{ version }}</div>

  <!-- ✅ GOOD -->
  <div>{{ `v${version}` }}</div>
  ```

- add the string as an exception in `.eslintrc.js` for the `@intlify/vue-i18n/no-raw-text` rule

> [!TIP]
> In most cases, literal strings will not be necessary. Think twice before using them.

## Adding a new locale

> [!NOTE]
> Only `EN` and `FR` locales are fully supported by XO team.

For other locales added by contributors, some keys might be missing when we add new translations.

This can result in ESLint errors when some translation keys are missing. To avoid this, remember to add the locale to the list of excluded files in `.eslintrc.js` at the root of the project (rule is `'@intlify/vue-i18n/no-missing-keys-in-other-locales': ['error', { ignoreLocales: ['de', 'fa'] }]` on line 218), and update the `@xen-orchestra/web-core/lib/i18n.ts` file to include the new locale.
