# Internationalization (i18n)

Internationalization of the app is done with [Vue-i18n](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/).

Sources of truth are `en.json` files.

## Translation files to use

All translation files are available in the `/web-core/lib/locales/` folder.

## Translation keys

Translation keys MUST be in English and SHOULD use kebab-case.

Translation keys MUST NOT be nested. To group keys, use `"prefix:key": "value"` instead of `"prefix": { "key": "value" }`.

Translation keys MUST be sorted alphabetically.

As a bonus, this will allow the usage of `foo` and `foo:bar` as separate keys.

❌ BAD

```json
{
  "bonjour": "Hello",
  "foo_bar": "Foo Bar",
  "a": "A",
  "a.b": "A B",
  "b": {
    "foo": "B Foo",
    "bar": "B Bar",
    "baz": "B Baz"
  },
  "c": "C"
}
```

✅ GOOD

```json
{
  "a": "A",
  "b:bar": "B Bar",
  "b:baz": "B Baz",
  "b:foo": "B Foo",
  "c": "C",
  "foo-bar": "Foo Bar",
  "foo:bar:baz": "Foo Bar Baz",
  "foo:bar-baz": "Foo Bar Baz",
  "hello": "Hello"
}
```

## Punctuation

Strings punctuation should be included in the translation key.

This allows better adapting the punctuation to the rules of the target language.

For example:

- in English, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with no space before it
- in French, interrogative sentences end with a question mark with a space before it
- in Spanish, interrogative sentences start with an inverted question mark and end with a question mark with no spaces

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since HTML is not accepted in translations, you must use a non-breaking space character (` `) instead of `&nbsp;`

### Example

#### English

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirm",
  "confirm?": "Confirm?",
  "warning": "Warning",
  "warning!:": "Warning!"
}
```

#### French

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmer",
  "confirm?": "Confirmer ?",
  "warning": "Avertissement",
  "warning!:": "Attention !"
}
```

#### Spanish

```json
{
  "confirm": "Confirmar",
  "confirm?": "¿Confirmar?",
  "warning": "Advertencia",
  "warning!:": "¡Atención!"
}
```

## Keys' naming conventions

When naming translation keys, follow these conventions:

- Use nouns for objects or entities (e.g., `user`, `car`, `dashboard-title`)
- Use verbs prefixed with `action:` for actions (e.g., `action:save`, `action:delete`, `action:update-profile`)
- Use `status:` prefix for status messages (e.g., `status:loading`, `status:error`, `status:running`)
- Use singular when naming a key representing an empty state (e.g., `no-user`, `no-host-connected`, `no-vm`), even if the translation output is plural in some languages

## Pluralization

Keys for objects SHOULD use singular nouns for singular and plural nouns for plural.

### Example

```json
{
  "car": "Car",
  "cars": "Cars",
  "user": "User",
  "users": "Users"
}
```

When a number is involved, the translation MUST use [VueI18n pluralization system](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/guide/essentials/pluralization.html), and the key's name SHOULD include `n` to indicate that.

To use pluralization in a template, use `t('n-key', n)` where the second argument `n` is the number used to determine the plural form.

### Example

```html
<p>{{ t('n-car', carCount) }}</p>
```

#### English

```json
{
  "n-car": "You have one car | You have {n} cars"
}
```

#### French

```json
{
  "n-car": "Vous avez une voiture | Vous avez {n} voitures"
}
```

## Handling zero in pluralization and custom plural forms

When handling the pluralization of zero, you should provide a separate translation value for the zero cases.

#### Example

```json
{
  "item-count": "You have no items | You have one item | You have {n} items"
}
```

#### French

```json
{
  "item-count": "Vous n'avez aucun article | Vous avez un article | Vous avez {n} articles"
}
```

To use a custom plural form for complex translations, please refer to the [VueI18n custom pluralization documentation](https://vue-i18n.intlify.dev/guide/essentials/pluralization.html#custom-pluralization).

## Linked translations

Sometimes you may want to add a translation key which provides more context in the usage, but the translation itself is the same as another key.

To do so, and to avoid duplications, you can use linked translations with the syntax `@:<key>`.

### Example

```json
{
  "save": "Save",
  "save-changes": "@:save"
}
```

This provides the option to override the `save-changes` translation in some locales if needed, while keeping the same translation as `save` by default.

## Percentages

To include a percentage in a translation, use `n(value, 'percent')`.

The value will be rounded to two decimal places maximum.

## Numbers

To include a number in a translation, use `n(value)`.

## Dates and times

To include a date or a time in a translation, use `d(value, '<format>')`.

### Example

```html
<p>{{ d(date, "date_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022 -->
<p>{{ d(date, "date_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ d(date, "date_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 -->
<p>{{ d(date, "datetime_short") }}</p>
<!-- 9/10/2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ d(date, "datetime_medium") }}</p>
<!-- Sep 10, 2022, 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ d(date, "datetime_long") }}</p>
<!-- September 10, 2022 at 06:30 PM -->
<p>{{ d(date, "time") }}</p>
<!-- 06:30 PM -->
```

## Literal strings

Literal strings are not allowed in Vue templates.

If you really need to **exceptionally** include a literal string, you can either:

- use the mustache syntax with concatenation

  ```html
  <!-- ❌ BAD -->
  <div>v{{ version }}</div>

  <!-- ✅ GOOD -->
  <div>{{ `v${version}` }}</div>
  ```

- add the string as an exception in `.eslintrc.js` for the `@intlify/vue-i18n/no-raw-text` rule

> [!TIP]
> In most cases, literal strings will not be necessary. Think twice before using them.

## Adding a new locale

> [!NOTE]
> Only `EN` and `FR` locales are fully supported by XO team.

For other locales added by contributors, some keys might be missing when we add new translations.

This can result in ESLint errors when some translation keys are missing. To avoid this, remember to add the locale to the list of excluded files in `.eslintrc.js` at the root of the project (rule is `'@intlify/vue-i18n/no-missing-keys-in-other-locales': ['error', { ignoreLocales: ['de', 'fa'] }]`), and update the `@xen-orchestra/web-core/lib/i18n.ts` file to include the new locale.
