docs/docs/restapi.md, before:

# REST API

:::warning ⚠️ Beta feature
This is a beta feature that may see some changes in the future. The fully up-to-date README [is available here](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/blob/master/packages/xo-server/docs/rest-api.md). This page is only here to explain how it works, it's not intended to be used as an accurate guide.
:::

We originally developed [our existing API](architecture.md#api) to be used between the Web UI `xo-web` and the server backend, `xo-server`. That's why it's a JSON-RPC API connected via websockets, allowing us to update objects live in the browser. This is perfect for our usage, but a bit complicated for others.

Also, this API wasn't meant to be public, but over the years some users have expressed a desire to be able to use it for their own purposes. This led us to add more tooling around it, like `xo-cli` and to answer specific requests.

For these reasons we decided to build a new API. Not an evolution of the current one, but 100% new. It is meant to be public and [REST-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer). So a simple curl command can request it. We will also provide documentation as the intended goal is for it to be used by the public.

## Authentication

A valid authentication token should be attached as a cookie to all HTTP
requests:

```http
GET /rest/v0 HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM
```

The server will respond to an invalid token with a `401 Unauthorized` status.

**[Not implemented at this time]** The server can request that the client updates its token with a `Set-Cookie` header:

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Set-Cookie: authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs
```

Usage with cURL:

```bash
curl -b \
    authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
    https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/
```

You can use `xo-cli` to create an authentication token:

```bash
$ xo-cli create-token xoa.company.lan admin@admin.net
Password: ********
Successfully logged with admin@admin.net
Authentication token created

DiYBFavJwf9GODZqQJs23eAx9eh3KlsRhBi8RcoX0KM
```

:::tip
Only admin users can currently use the API.
:::

## Collections request

Collections of objects are available at `/<name>` (e.g. `/vms`)

The following query parameters are supported:

- `limit`: max number of objects returned
- `fields`: if specified, instead of plain URLs, the results will be objects containing the requested fields
- `filter`: a string that will be used to select only matching objects, see [the syntax documentation](manage_infrastructure.md#live-filter-search)
- `ndjson`: if specified, the result will be in [NDJSON format](https://github.com/ndjson/ndjson-spec)

Simple request:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

[
  "/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac",
  "/rest/v0/vms/5019156b-f40d-bc57-835b-4a259b177be1"
]
```

Here is an example with `curl`:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=0OQIKwb1WjeHtch25Ls \
  http://xoa.example.com/rest/v0/vms?fields=name_label,power_state
[
  {
    "name_label": "FreeNAS",
    "power_state": "Running",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/0fc14abc-ae7a-4209-79c4-d20ca1f0e567"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "Ubuntu 20.04 test",
    "power_state": "Halted",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/d505eb99-164e-5516-27e1-43837a01be45"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "Rocky Linux 8",
    "power_state": "Halted",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/38f423b7-1498-ee8c-ca8d-d3bb8fcffcf2"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "XOA 🎷",
    "power_state": "Running",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/857e34e5-c61a-f3f1-65e6-a7a9306b347b"
  }
]
```

As NDJSON:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms?fields=name_label,power_state&ndjson HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/x-ndjson

{"name_label":"Debian 10 Cloudinit","power_state":"Running","url":"/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac"}
{"name_label":"Debian 10 Cloudinit self-service","power_state":"Halted","url":"/rest/v0/vms/5019156b-f40d-bc57-835b-4a259b177be1"}
```

## Task monitoring

### Specific task

When fetching a task record, the special `wait` query string can be used. If its value is `result` it will wait for the task to be resolved (either success or failure) before returning; otherwise, it will wait for the next change of state.

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/tasks/0lr4zljbe?wait=result'
```

### All tasks

A watch mode is available when fetching the collection as NDJSON by using both `ndjson` and `watch` query strings. Instead of sending the objects directly, each entry will be an array `[event, object]`. `event` can be either `remove` to mean that an object has been removed from the collection or `update` to mean that an object has been added to the collection or updated.

In case of the `remove` event, only the `id` properties of the deleted object is available.

The `fields` and `filter` parameters are supported.

Example:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms?fields=start,status&ndjson&watch HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/x-ndjson

["remove",{"href":"/rest/v0/tasks/0lv13orww"}]
["update",{"start":1713194362080,"status":"pending","href":"/rest/v0/tasks/0lv13otzz"}]
```

> This request does not send existing tasks, only events. If you want to get the whole collection and keep it up-to-date, the correct way to do that is:
>
> 1. start a watch request
> 2. fetch the whole collection via a normal request
> 3. process events sent by the watch request to update the local cache

## Properties update

> This feature is restricted to `name_label`, `name_description` and `tags` at the moment.

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'Accept: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name_label": "The new name", "name_description": "The new description" }' \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac'
```

### Collections

For collection properties, like `tags`, it can be more practical to touch a single item without impacting the others.

An item can be created with `PUT <collection>/<item id>` and can be destroyed with `DELETE <collection>/<item id>`.

Adding a tag:

```sh
curl \
-X PUT \
-b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/tags/My%20tag'
```

Removing a tag:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/tags/My%20tag'
```

## VM and VDI destruction

For a VM:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac'
```

For a VDI:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674'
```

## VM and VDI export

VDI export and VM export are supported by the API. Below is a simple example to export a VM with `zstd` compression into a `myVM.xva` file:

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jFEAZXOAGKFkTbs \
  'https://xoa.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237a12.xva?compress=zstd' \
  > myVM.xva
```

A VDI can be exported in VHD format at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.vhd` or the raw content at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.raw`.

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7FkTbs \
  'https://xoa.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674.vhd' \
  > myDisk.vhd
```

The following optional query parameters are supported for VDI export:

- `preferNbd`: will use NBD for export if available
- `nbdConcurrency=<integer>`: set the number of concurrent stream per disk if NBD is enabled, default 1

## VM Import

> OVA import is not supported.

A VM can be imported by posting an XVA to `/rest/v0/pools/:id/vms`.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.raw \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/pools/355ee47d-ff4c-4924-3db2-fd86ae629676/vms?sr=357bd56c-71f9-4b2a-83b8-3451dec04b8f' \
  | cat
```

The `sr` query parameter can be used to specify on which SR the VM should be imported, if not specified, the default SR will be used.

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

## VDI Import

### Existing VDI

A VHD or a raw export can be imported in an existing VDI respectively at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.vhd` and `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.raw`.

> Note: the size of the VDI must match exactly the size of VDI that was previously exported.

```sh
curl \
  -X PUT \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.vhd \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674.vhd' \
  | cat
```

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

### New VDI

An export can also be imported on an SR to create a new VDI at `/rest/v0/srs/<sr uuid>/vdis`.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.raw \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/srs/357bd56c-71f9-4b2a-83b8-3451dec04b8f/vdis?raw&name_label=my_imported_VDI' \
  | cat
```

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

This request returns the UUID of the created VDI.

The following query parameters are supported to customize the created VDI:

- `name_label`
- `name_description`
- `raw`: this parameter must be used if importing a raw export instead of a VHD

## Actions

### Available actions

To see the actions available on objects of a specific collection, get the collection at `/rest/v0/<type>/_/actions`.

For example, to list all actions on a VM:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/vms/_/actions'
[
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/clean_reboot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/clean_shutdown",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/hard_reboot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/hard_shutdown",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/snapshot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/start"
]
```

To see more information about a specific action, you can checkout its endpoint:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/snapshot'
{
  "params": {
    "name_label": {
      "type": "string",
      "optional": true
    }
  }
}
```

The field `params` contains the [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/) for the parameters.

### Start an action

Post at the action endpoint which is `/rest/v0/<type>/<uuid>/actions/<action>`.

For instance, to reboot a VM:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/clean_reboot'
```

Some actions accept parameters, they should be provided in a JSON-encoded object as the request body:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'Accept: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name_label": "My snapshot" }' \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/snapshot'
```

By default, actions are asynchronous and return the reference of the task associated with the request (see [_Task monitoring_](#task-monitoring)).

The `?sync` flag can be used to run the action synchronously without requiring task monitoring. The result of the action will be returned encoded as JSON:

```console
$ curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/clean_reboot'
"2b0266aa-c753-6fbc-e4dd-c79be7782052"
```

## Future Improvements

We are actively working on enhancing and expanding the REST API with new features and capabilities. If you have specific use cases, ideas, or feedback that you would like to share, feel free to participate in the discussion on our [Xen Orchestra forum](https://xcp-ng.org/forum/category/12/xen-orchestra).

We encourage feedback and suggestions to help us make this documentation as useful and complete as possible.

### OpenAPI/Swagger

#### What is Swagger?

[Swagger](https://swagger.io/specification/) allows you to describe the structure of an API so that machines can understand. By parsing the structure of the API, Swagger can automatically generate clear, user-friendly, and interactive API documentation. It also makes integration with tools and automatic client library generation possible.

As part of our continuous efforts to improve the developer experience, we’ve begun documenting the Xen Orchestra REST API using the OpenAPI (Swagger) standard:

![VM getID enpoints documented in Swagger](./assets/swagger-example.png)

:::tip

The Swagger API documentation is still a work in progress. Not all endpoints are currently covered, and some details may change as we continue to refine the specification. However, it already provides a solid foundation for understanding and interacting with key parts of the API.

:::

#### Accessing the Xen Orchestra API documentation in Swagger

Both versions of the API are now available at `/rest/v0`. However, only the endpoints that have been migrated to the new Swagger setup will show up in the documentation at `/rest/v0/docs`.

The Swagger UI doesn't just provide documentation of available endpoints. It also **lets you test them directly from the interface**, making it easier to experiment with the API without writing any code.

As we continue the migration process, the documentation will expand and improve. Our goal is that once everything is fully transitioned, `/rest/v0` will automatically redirect to the docs.

Commit message:

docs(restapi): clean up the rest api page
As the API endpoints are getting more and more documented in Swagger, there are now multiple sources of documentation of the REST API, which can cause confusion for users.

This improvement completes the REST API page of the XO doc, removes the
mention of Swagger as a 'future' improvement', and removes the
packages/xoserver/docs/rest-api.md page since it duplicates the info
about the REST API

Signed-off-by: Thomas Moraine <thomas.moraine@vates.tech>

docs/docs/restapi.md, after:

# REST API

:::warning ⚠️ Beta feature
This is a beta feature that may see some changes in the future. The fully up-to-date README [is available here](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/blob/master/packages/xo-server/docs/rest-api.md). This page is only here to explain how it works, it's not intended to be used as an accurate guide.
:::

We originally developed [our existing API](architecture.md#api) to be used between the Web UI `xo-web` and the server backend, `xo-server`. That's why it's a JSON-RPC API connected via websockets, allowing us to update objects live in the browser. This is perfect for our usage, but a bit complicated for others.

Also, this API wasn't meant to be public, but over the years some users have expressed a desire to be able to use it for their own purposes. This led us to add more tooling around it, like `xo-cli` and to answer specific requests.

For these reasons we decided to build a new API. Not an evolution of the current one, but 100% new. It is meant to be public and [REST-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer). So a simple curl command can request it. We will also provide documentation as the intended goal is for it to be used by the public.

## Authentication

A valid authentication token should be attached as a cookie to all HTTP
requests:

```http
GET /rest/v0 HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM
```

The server will respond to an invalid token with a `401 Unauthorized` status.

**[Not implemented at this time]** The server can request that the client updates its token with a `Set-Cookie` header:

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Set-Cookie: authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs
```

Usage with cURL:

```bash
curl -b \
    authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
    https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/
```

You can use `xo-cli` to create an authentication token:

```bash
$ xo-cli create-token xoa.company.lan admin@admin.net
Password: ********
Successfully logged with admin@admin.net
Authentication token created

DiYBFavJwf9GODZqQJs23eAx9eh3KlsRhBi8RcoX0KM
```

:::tip
Only admin users can currently use the API.
:::

## Collections request

Collections of objects are available at `/<name>` (e.g. `/vms`)

The following query parameters are supported:

- `limit`: max number of objects returned
- `fields`: if specified, instead of plain URLs, the results will be objects containing the requested fields
- `filter`: a string that will be used to select only matching objects, see [the syntax documentation](manage_infrastructure.md#live-filter-search)
- `ndjson`: if specified, the result will be in [NDJSON format](https://github.com/ndjson/ndjson-spec)

Simple request:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

[
  "/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac",
  "/rest/v0/vms/5019156b-f40d-bc57-835b-4a259b177be1"
]
```

With custom fields:

```
GET /rest/v0/vms?fields=name_label,power_state HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

[
  {
    "name_label": "Debian 10 Cloudinit",
    "power_state": "Running",
    "url": "/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "Debian 10 Cloudinit self-service",
    "power_state": "Halted",
    "url": "/rest/v0/vms/5019156b-f40d-bc57-835b-4a259b177be1"
  }
]

Here is an example with `curl`:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=0OQIKwb1WjeHtch25Ls \
  http://xoa.example.com/rest/v0/vms?fields=name_label,power_state
[
  {
    "name_label": "FreeNAS",
    "power_state": "Running",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/0fc14abc-ae7a-4209-79c4-d20ca1f0e567"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "Ubuntu 20.04 test",
    "power_state": "Halted",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/d505eb99-164e-5516-27e1-43837a01be45"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "Rocky Linux 8",
    "power_state": "Halted",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/38f423b7-1498-ee8c-ca8d-d3bb8fcffcf2"
  },
  {
    "name_label": "XOA 🎷",
    "power_state": "Running",
    "href": "/rest/v0/vms/857e34e5-c61a-f3f1-65e6-a7a9306b347b"
  }
]
```

As NDJSON:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms?fields=name_label,power_state&ndjson HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/x-ndjson

{"name_label":"Debian 10 Cloudinit","power_state":"Running","url":"/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac"}
{"name_label":"Debian 10 Cloudinit self-service","power_state":"Halted","url":"/rest/v0/vms/5019156b-f40d-bc57-835b-4a259b177be1"}
```

## Task monitoring

### Specific task

When fetching a task record, the special `wait` query string can be used. If its value is `result` it will wait for the task to be resolved (either success or failure) before returning; otherwise, it will wait for the next change of state.

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/tasks/0lr4zljbe?wait=result'
```

### All tasks

A watch mode is available when fetching the collection as NDJSON by using both `ndjson` and `watch` query strings. Instead of sending the objects directly, each entry will be an array `[event, object]`. `event` can be either `remove` to mean that an object has been removed from the collection or `update` to mean that an object has been added to the collection or updated.

In case of the `remove` event, only the `id` properties of the deleted object is available.

The `fields` and `filter` parameters are supported.

Example:

```http
GET /rest/v0/vms?fields=start,status&ndjson&watch HTTP/1.1
Cookie: authenticationToken=TN2YBOMYtXB_hHtf4wTzm9p5tTuqq2i15yeuhcz2xXM

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/x-ndjson

["remove",{"href":"/rest/v0/tasks/0lv13orww"}]
["update",{"start":1713194362080,"status":"pending","href":"/rest/v0/tasks/0lv13otzz"}]
```

> This request does not send existing tasks, only events. If you want to get the whole collection and keep it up-to-date, the correct way to do that is:
>
> 1. start a watch request
> 2. fetch the whole collection via a normal request
> 3. process events sent by the watch request to update the local cache

## Properties update

> This feature is restricted to `name_label`, `name_description` and `tags` at the moment.

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'Accept: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name_label": "The new name", "name_description": "The new description" }' \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac'
```

### Collections

For collection properties, like `tags`, it can be more practical to touch a single item without impacting the others.

An item can be created with `PUT <collection>/<item id>` and can be destroyed with `DELETE <collection>/<item id>`.

Adding a tag:

```sh
curl \
-X PUT \
-b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/tags/My%20tag'
```

Removing a tag:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/tags/My%20tag'
```

## VM and VDI destruction

For a VM:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac'
```

For a VDI:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674'
```

## VM and VDI export

VDI export and VM export are supported by the API. Below is a simple example to export a VM with `zstd` compression into a `myVM.xva` file:

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jFEAZXOAGKFkTbs \
  'https://xoa.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237a12.xva?compress=zstd' \
  > myVM.xva
```

A VDI can be exported in VHD format at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.vhd` or the raw content at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.raw`.

```sh
curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7FkTbs \
  'https://xoa.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674.vhd' \
  > myDisk.vhd
```

The following optional query parameters are supported for VDI export:

- `preferNbd`: will use NBD for export if available
- `nbdConcurrency=<integer>`: set the number of concurrent stream per disk if NBD is enabled, default 1

## VM Import

> OVA import is not supported.

A VM can be imported by posting an XVA to `/rest/v0/pools/:id/vms`.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.raw \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/pools/355ee47d-ff4c-4924-3db2-fd86ae629676/vms?sr=357bd56c-71f9-4b2a-83b8-3451dec04b8f' \
  | cat
```

The `sr` query parameter can be used to specify on which SR the VM should be imported, if not specified, the default SR will be used.

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

## VDI Import

### Existing VDI

A VHD or a raw export can be imported in an existing VDI respectively at `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.vhd` and `/rest/v0/vdis/<uuid>.raw`.

> Note: the size of the VDI must match exactly the size of VDI that was previously exported.

```sh
curl \
  -X PUT \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.vhd \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vdis/1a269782-ea93-4c4c-897a-475365f7b674.vhd' \
  | cat
```

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

### New VDI

An export can also be imported on an SR to create a new VDI at `/rest/v0/srs/<sr uuid>/vdis`.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -T myDisk.raw \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/srs/357bd56c-71f9-4b2a-83b8-3451dec04b8f/vdis?raw&name_label=my_imported_VDI' \
  | cat
```

> Note: the final `| cat` ensures cURL's standard output is not a TTY, which is necessary for upload stats to be displayed.

This request returns the UUID of the created VDI.

The following query parameters are supported to customize the created VDI:

- `name_label`
- `name_description`
- `raw`: this parameter must be used if importing a raw export instead of a VHD

## Actions

### Available actions

To see the actions available on objects of a specific collection, get the collection at `/rest/v0/<type>/_/actions`.

For example, to list all actions on a VM:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/vms/_/actions'
[
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/clean_reboot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/clean_shutdown",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/hard_reboot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/hard_shutdown",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/snapshot",
"/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/start"
]
```

To see more information about a specific action, you can checkout its endpoint:

```console
$ curl \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.company.lan/rest/v0/vms/_/actions/snapshot'
{
  "params": {
    "name_label": {
      "type": "string",
      "optional": true
    }
  }
}
```

The field `params` contains the [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/) for the parameters.

### Start an action

Post at the action endpoint which is `/rest/v0/<type>/<uuid>/actions/<action>`.

For instance, to reboot a VM:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/clean_reboot'
```

Some actions accept parameters, they should be provided in a JSON-encoded object as the request body:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'Accept: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name_label": "My snapshot" }' \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/snapshot'
```

By default, actions are asynchronous and return the reference of the task associated with the request (see [_Task monitoring_](#task-monitoring)).

The `?sync` flag can be used to run the action synchronously without requiring task monitoring. The result of the action will be returned encoded as JSON:

```console
$ curl \
  -X POST \
  -b authenticationToken=KQxQdm2vMiv7jBIK0hgkmgxKzemd8wSJ7ugFGKFkTbs \
  'https://xo.example.org/rest/v0/vms/770aa52a-fd42-8faf-f167-8c5c4a237cac/actions/clean_reboot'
"2b0266aa-c753-6fbc-e4dd-c79be7782052"
```

## OpenAPI/Swagger

### What is Swagger?

[Swagger](https://swagger.io/specification/) allows you to describe the structure of an API so that machines can understand. By parsing the structure of the API, Swagger can automatically generate clear, user-friendly, and interactive API documentation. It also makes integration with tools and automatic client library generation possible.

As part of our continuous efforts to improve the developer experience, we’ve begun documenting the Xen Orchestra REST API using the OpenAPI (Swagger) standard:

![VM getID enpoints documented in Swagger](./assets/swagger-example.png)

:::tip

The Swagger API documentation is still a work in progress. Not all endpoints are currently covered, and some details may change as we continue to refine the specification. However, it already provides a solid foundation for understanding and interacting with key parts of the API.

:::

### Accessing the Xen Orchestra API documentation in Swagger

Both versions of the API are now available at `/rest/v0`. However, only the endpoints that have been migrated to the new Swagger setup will show up in the documentation at `/rest/v0/docs`.

The Swagger UI doesn't just provide documentation of available endpoints. It also **lets you test them directly from the interface**, making it easier to experiment with the API without writing any code.

As we continue the migration process, the documentation will expand and improve. Our goal is that once everything is fully transitioned, `/rest/v0` will automatically redirect to the docs.

## Ongoing Improvements

We are actively working on enhancing and expanding the REST API with new features and capabilities. If you have specific use cases, ideas, or feedback that you would like to share, feel free to participate in the discussion on our [Xen Orchestra forum](https://xcp-ng.org/forum/category/12/xen-orchestra).
