packages/xo-server-test/README.md, before:

<!-- DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY, THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED -->

# xo-server-test

> Test client for Xo-Server

## Usage

Tests are ran sequentially to avoid concurrency issues.

## Adding a test

### Organization

```
src
├─ user
|   ├─ __snapshots__
|   |     └─ index.spec.js.snap
|   └─ index.spec.js
├─ job
|   └─ index.spec.js
├─ issues
¦   └─ index.spec.js
¦
├─ _xoConnection.js
└─ util.js
```

The tests can describe:

- XO methods or scenarios:

`src/user/index.js`

```js
import xo from '../_xoConnection'

describe('user', () => {
  // testing a method
  describe('.set()', () => {
    it('sets an email', async () => {
      // some tests using xo methods and helpers from _xoConnection.js
      const id = await xo.createTempUser(SIMPLE_USER)
      expect(await xo.call('user.set', params)).toBe(true)
      expect(await xo.getUser(id)).toMatchSnapshot({
        id: expect.any(String),
      })
    })
  })

  // testing a scenario
  test('create two users, modify a user email to be the same with the other and fail trying to connect them', () => {
    /* some tests */
  })
})
```

- issues

`src/issues/index.js`

```js
describe('issue', () => {
  test('5454', () => {
    /* some tests */
  })
})
```

### Best practices

- The test environment must remain the same before and after each test:

  - each resource created must be deleted
  - existing resources should not be altered

- Make a sentence for the title of the test. It must be clear and consistent.

- If the feature you want to test is not implemented : write it and skip it, using `it.skip()`.

- Take values ​​that cover the maximum of testing possibilities.

- If you make tests which keep track of large object, it is better to use snapshots.

- `_xoConnection.js` contains helpers to create temporary resources and to interface with XO.
  You can use it if you need to create resources which will be automatically deleted after the test:

  ```javascript
  import xo from '../_xoConnection'

  describe('.create()', () => {
    it('creates a user without permission', async () => {
      // The user will be deleted automatically at the end of the test
      const userId = await xo.createTempUser({
        email: 'wayne1@vates.fr',
        password: 'batman1',
      })
      expect(await xo.getUser(userId)).toMatchSnapshot({
        id: expect.any(String),
      })
    })
  })
  ```

  The available helpers:

  - `createTempUser(params)`
  - `getUser(id)`
  - `createTempJob(params)`
  - `createTempBackupNgJob(params)`
  - `createTempVm(params)`
  - `getSchedule(predicate)`

## Usage

- Before running the tests, you have to create a config file for xo-server-test.

  ```
  > cp sample.config.toml ~/.config/xo-server-test/config.toml
  ```

  And complete it.

- To run the tests:

  ```
  > npm ci
  > yarn start
  ```

  You get all the test suites passed (`PASS`) or failed (`FAIL`).

  ```
  > yarn test
  yarn run v1.9.4
  $ jest
   PASS  src/user/user.spec.js
   PASS  src/job/job.spec.js
   PASS  src/backupNg/backupNg.spec.js

  Test Suites: 3 passed, 3 total
  Tests:       2 skipped, 36 passed, 38 total
  Snapshots:   35 passed, 35 total
  Time:        7.257s, estimated 8s
  Ran all test suites.
  Done in 7.92s.
  ```

- You can run only tests related to changed files, and review the failed output by using: `> yarn start --watch`

- ⚠ Warning: snapshots ⚠
  After each run of the tests, check that snapshots are not inadvertently modified.

- ⚠ Jest known issue ⚠
  If a test timeout is triggered the next async tests can fail, it's due to an inadvertently modified snapshots.
  As a workaround, you can clean your git working tree and re-run jest using a large timeout: `> yarn start --testTimeout=100000`

## Contributions

Contributions are _very_ welcomed, either on the documentation or on
the code.

You may:

- report any [issue](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/issues)
  you've encountered;
- fork and create a pull request.

## License

[AGPL-3.0-or-later](https://spdx.org/licenses/AGPL-3.0-or-later) © [Vates SAS](https://vates.fr)

Commit message:

chore: use pnpm instead of Yarn

packages/xo-server-test/README.md, after:

<!-- DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY, THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED -->

# xo-server-test

> Test client for Xo-Server

## Usage

Tests are ran sequentially to avoid concurrency issues.

## Adding a test

### Organization

```
src
├─ user
|   ├─ __snapshots__
|   |     └─ index.spec.js.snap
|   └─ index.spec.js
├─ job
|   └─ index.spec.js
├─ issues
¦   └─ index.spec.js
¦
├─ _xoConnection.js
└─ util.js
```

The tests can describe:

- XO methods or scenarios:

`src/user/index.js`

```js
import xo from '../_xoConnection'

describe('user', () => {
  // testing a method
  describe('.set()', () => {
    it('sets an email', async () => {
      // some tests using xo methods and helpers from _xoConnection.js
      const id = await xo.createTempUser(SIMPLE_USER)
      expect(await xo.call('user.set', params)).toBe(true)
      expect(await xo.getUser(id)).toMatchSnapshot({
        id: expect.any(String),
      })
    })
  })

  // testing a scenario
  test('create two users, modify a user email to be the same with the other and fail trying to connect them', () => {
    /* some tests */
  })
})
```

- issues

`src/issues/index.js`

```js
describe('issue', () => {
  test('5454', () => {
    /* some tests */
  })
})
```

### Best practices

- The test environment must remain the same before and after each test:

  - each resource created must be deleted
  - existing resources should not be altered

- Make a sentence for the title of the test. It must be clear and consistent.

- If the feature you want to test is not implemented : write it and skip it, using `it.skip()`.

- Take values ​​that cover the maximum of testing possibilities.

- If you make tests which keep track of large object, it is better to use snapshots.

- `_xoConnection.js` contains helpers to create temporary resources and to interface with XO.
  You can use it if you need to create resources which will be automatically deleted after the test:

  ```javascript
  import xo from '../_xoConnection'

  describe('.create()', () => {
    it('creates a user without permission', async () => {
      // The user will be deleted automatically at the end of the test
      const userId = await xo.createTempUser({
        email: 'wayne1@vates.fr',
        password: 'batman1',
      })
      expect(await xo.getUser(userId)).toMatchSnapshot({
        id: expect.any(String),
      })
    })
  })
  ```

  The available helpers:

  - `createTempUser(params)`
  - `getUser(id)`
  - `createTempJob(params)`
  - `createTempBackupNgJob(params)`
  - `createTempVm(params)`
  - `getSchedule(predicate)`

## Usage

- Before running the tests, you have to create a config file for xo-server-test.

  ```
  > cp sample.config.toml ~/.config/xo-server-test/config.toml
  ```

  And complete it.

- To run the tests:

  ```
  > npm ci
  > npm run start
  ```

  You get all the test suites passed (`PASS`) or failed (`FAIL`).

  ```
  > npm run test
  npm run v1.9.4
  $ jest
   PASS  src/user/user.spec.js
   PASS  src/job/job.spec.js
   PASS  src/backupNg/backupNg.spec.js

  Test Suites: 3 passed, 3 total
  Tests:       2 skipped, 36 passed, 38 total
  Snapshots:   35 passed, 35 total
  Time:        7.257s, estimated 8s
  Ran all test suites.
  Done in 7.92s.
  ```

- You can run only tests related to changed files, and review the failed output by using: `> npm run start --watch`

- ⚠ Warning: snapshots ⚠
  After each run of the tests, check that snapshots are not inadvertently modified.

- ⚠ Jest known issue ⚠
  If a test timeout is triggered the next async tests can fail, it's due to an inadvertently modified snapshots.
  As a workaround, you can clean your git working tree and re-run jest using a large timeout: `> npm run start --testTimeout=100000`

## Contributions

Contributions are _very_ welcomed, either on the documentation or on
the code.

You may:

- report any [issue](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/issues)
  you've encountered;
- fork and create a pull request.

## License

[AGPL-3.0-or-later](https://spdx.org/licenses/AGPL-3.0-or-later) © [Vates SAS](https://vates.fr)
