@vates/fuse-vhd/README.md, before:

<!-- DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY, THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED -->

# @vates/fuse-vhd

[![Package Version](https://badgen.net/npm/v/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd) ![License](https://badgen.net/npm/license/@vates/fuse-vhd) [![PackagePhobia](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=@vates/fuse-vhd) [![Node compatibility](https://badgen.net/npm/node/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd)

## Install

Installation of the [npm package](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd):

```sh
npm install --save @vates/fuse-vhd
```

## Usage

Mount a vhd generated by xen-orchestra to filesystem

### Library

```js
import { mount } from 'fuse-vhd'

// return a disposable, see promise-toolbox/Disposable
// unmount automatically when disposable is disposed
// in case of differencing VHD, it mounts the full chain
await mount(handler, diskId, mountPoint)
```

### cli

From the install folder :

```
cli.mjs <remoteUrl> <vhdPathInRemote> <mountPoint>
```

After installing the package

```
xo-fuse-vhd <remoteUrl> <vhdPathInRemote> <mountPoint>
```

remoteUrl can be found by using cli in `@xen-orchestra/fs` , for example a local remote will have a url like `file:///path/to/remote/root`

## Contributions

Contributions are _very_ welcomed, either on the documentation or on
the code.

You may:

- report any [issue](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/issues)
  you've encountered;
- fork and create a pull request.

## License

[ISC](https://spdx.org/licenses/ISC) © [Vates SAS](https://vates.fr)

Commit message:

docs(fuse-vhd): document cli file restoration (#8355)
Document how to restore a file from a VHD with fuse-vhd CLI.
This will allow users to restore by themselves large files that make the restore fail when done from the UI.

@vates/fuse-vhd/README.md, after:

<!-- DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY, THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED -->

# @vates/fuse-vhd

[![Package Version](https://badgen.net/npm/v/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd) ![License](https://badgen.net/npm/license/@vates/fuse-vhd) [![PackagePhobia](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=@vates/fuse-vhd) [![Node compatibility](https://badgen.net/npm/node/@vates/fuse-vhd)](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd)

## Install

Installation of the [npm package](https://npmjs.org/package/@vates/fuse-vhd):

```sh
npm install --save @vates/fuse-vhd
```

## Usage

Mount a vhd generated by xen-orchestra to filesystem

### Library

```js
import { mount } from 'fuse-vhd'

// return a disposable, see promise-toolbox/Disposable
// unmount automatically when disposable is disposed
// in case of differencing VHD, it mounts the full chain
await mount(handler, diskId, mountPoint)
```

### cli

From the install folder:

```
cli.mjs <remoteUrl> <vhdPathInRemote> <mountPoint>
```

After installing the package

```
xo-fuse-vhd <remoteUrl> <vhdPathInRemote> <mountPoint>
```

The `remoteUrl` can be found using the following command from the XOA CLI, and then picking the right `url` property:

`xo-server-db ls remote`

The `vhdPathInRemote` follows a file structure described [here](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/blob/master/%40xen-orchestra/backups/docs/VM%20backups/README.md).

## Restore a file from a VHD using `fuse-vhd` CLI

1. Mount a VHD to the Filesystem (see **Usage**).
2. Verify the VHD is Correctly Mounted:

`mount | grep fuse`

3. Get the `START` and `SIZE` of the disk whose file you want to restore. Multiply `START` by 512 (block size) to get the offset value. (`mountedVhdPath` is the `mountPoint` value from earlier, followed by `/vhd0`, for example). Depending on the partition type, you may need to do some additional setup to discover the partitions.

`partx --bytes --output=NR,START,SIZE,NAME,UUID,TYPE --pairs <mountedVhdPath>`

4.  Mount the disk. Depending on the partition type, you may need to add some additionnal options. The `norecovery` option is used for ext3/ext4/xfs file systems, otherwise remove this option.

`mount --options=loop,ro,norecovery,sizelimit=<SIZE>,offset=<START*512>  --source=<mountedVhdPath> --target=<diskMountPoint>`

5. Copy your files from the mounted partition, then unmount the partition.

## Contributions

Contributions are _very_ welcomed, either on the documentation or on
the code.

You may:

- report any [issue](https://github.com/vatesfr/xen-orchestra/issues)
  you've encountered;
- fork and create a pull request.

## License

[ISC](https://spdx.org/licenses/ISC) © [Vates SAS](https://vates.fr)
